Various Ways MIDI Input is handled.
Chris Ahlstrom
2025-10-08 to 2025-11-16

This file present some of the ways input works and how to improve it.
One issue is how poll_for_midi() is not implemented in ALSA but is used
by midi::player.

General Methods:

    Here we discuss how input works at a high level. First, possible
    features.

        -   One client, one thread, and one input queue per port.
            A poll of that queue, and a pop of any existing event.
        -   One client, one thread, and one queue to handle all ports.
            The port for each event used to route to a specific track.
        -   ZZ

    ALSA:

        RtMidi:

            The original RtMidi (v. 5 or v. 6) code works by creating a
            new client for each port. [See the discussion of main in the
            cbmidiin.cpp test module.] Each port has its own thread
            running the MIDI input function, which uses the input-data
            queue established for each port. The input function
            loops, using poll() to detect input.

            An alternative would be to use one client and a mutex
            in the MIDI handler.

        Poll-for-MIDI [tentative]:

            It is assumed that a single client will be created, so
            that only one thread can be used to handle the input.
            This thread would poll, either for any input or the input
            of a specific port. The input thread would then
            call get_midi_event() or get_midi_message().

            A. In the poll function, get the message, stick it
               in the input queue of the port. and return "true"
               to get it via get_message().

            B. Have the 

    JACK:

        To do.

    Basics:

        ALSA:

            The basic inputs as done by the cbminiin and qmidiin test
            applications rely on the midi_api object starting an input
            thread. This thread starts rtl::midi_alsa_handler(). That does
            the following:

                -   Set up a MIDI event parser.
                -   Reallocate, if needed, a data buffer.
                -   Set up ALSA sequencer poll descriptors.
                -   Run a loop that checks for pending input; if not,
                    it polls the descriptor, reading the first descriptor.
                    Otherwise....
                    -   Retrieves the event.
                    -   Checks for certain "SND_SEQ_EVENT" data, such as
                        SysEx, and flags to decode them.
                    -   Decodes the event. The data is entered into
                        a midi::message which gets time-stamped.
                    -   If using an input callback, the message is
                        passed to the callback. Otherwise it is pushed
                        into the rtmidi_in_data message queue.

            One disadvantage of using an input thread is that ALSA is
            not, at the user level, threadsafe. Therefore, each
            client/port must have its own thread, or segfaults are likely.

        JACK:

            Processing is handled by setting up callbacks. There is
            no input thread for polling. The primary callback is
            jack_process_in().

                -   It gets the event count.
                -   It loops, getting the delta time.
                -   It handles the realtime messages somewhat like
                    in the ALSA code.
                -   If using an input callback, the message is passed to
                    the callback. Otherwise it is pushed into the
                    rtmidi_in_data message queue, just as in ALSA.

        Input callback usage, cbmidiin:

            -   The top-most input handler is an rtl::rtmidi_in object.
                It is used in the following steps.
            -   An input callback is provided using only the midi::message
                parameter. (The other parameters are ignored).
            -   ignore_midi_types() is called to allow all types of
                message.
            -   In ALSA, the callback is called in midi_alsa_handler() if
                callback usage is enabled. In JACK, the call is made in
                jack_process_in().
            -   Bug? If the keyboard is struck a few times before choosing
                the port, then one pair of Note On/Off messages are
                received immediately once the choice is made.

        Polling, qmidiin:
    
            -   The top-most input handler is an rtl::rtmidi_in object.
                It is used in the following steps.
            -   ignore_midi_types() is called to allow all types of
                message.
            -   Must ignore messages of size 0, which happens constantly.
                Can we fix this side-effect of polling?
            -   On rare occasions the time-stamp is non 0. Why?
            -   Why is Ctrl-C needed? It is not in cbmidiin.
            -   Need to silence JACK messages when not running with JACK.
            -   Still need to check poll_for_midi() vs get_midi_event().

        Seq66 (a master bus implementation):

            The master bus creates an array of input buses. Each bus
            represents one MIDI port, and holds information about
            the type of port, order in the list of ports, the client ID
            (for ALSA), the port ID and name, etc.

            -   midibase. This class provides for setup and teardown of a
                port. It provides mutex locking and calls to API
                functions.
            -   midibus. The RtMidi implementation of this class provides
                various overrides of midibase API functions. These functions
                pass the processing to the specific midi_api pointer
                that implements portmidi, ALSA, and JACK processing.
                Important for input is api_poll_for_midi().
            -   businfo. Holds a pointer to a midibus, and adds
                information about activity and status.
            -   busarray. Holds a vector of businfo objects. API functions
                can be called by bus ID or loop over all businfos. In
                particular, poll_for_midi() calls the function of the
                same name for each input buss, in that order.
            -   mastermidibase. Holds global setting for clocking and
                I/O, an input and output busarrays, a set of tracks
                ("sequences") to which it can provide input, and functions
                like api_poll_for_midi() which calls the same function
                in the input busarray.
            -   mastermidibus. This class add support to get all of the
                virtual (configured) and real (existing) ports and
                then create midibusses that get added to the I/O
                busarrays.

            One thing to note is that the API does not use an input
            thread directly. Instead, another class creates it
            and uses it to communicate to ports via a masterbus,
            using periodic polls of the input.

            Disadvantages:

                -   The businfo class items could simply be included
                    in midibus.
                -   Iterating through the input busses can starve the
                    busses with higher ID numbers.
                -   There is an extra layer of indirection (to support
                    PortMidi) which adds latency.
                -   JACK: the methods used cause erratic timing at
                    lower jack frame rates.

        Rtl66 masterbus implementation:

            The masterbus essentially replaces and augments the standard
            parts of RtMidi so that one ALSA client is shared between
            all the ports, just as done in Seq66.

                -   It turns off the usage of an input thread for each
                    MIDI input port.
                -   It replaces it with serial polling of all the ports.
                    Should support a round robin.

            To do:

                -   Add support similar to the inputs/clocks list of
                    Seq66.
                -   Derive seq66/portslist from the newer midi/ports
                    class

# vim: sw=4 ts=4 wm=8 et ft=sh

